JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
NIGEL FARAGE, European
Parliament Member:
The sun has risen on an
independent United
Kingdom.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A vote that's
rocked the world.
We're in London to hear what
drove Britain
to leave the European Union.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The desire to
leave was expressed
most strongly in the
working-class neighborhoods
that we visited, where residents
felt beaten
down by globalization.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Financial markets
plunge in
reaction -- what Brexit means
for the global
economy.
And it's Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks
analyze what Britain's split may
say about
the mood of American voters.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The British
people have spoken,
and, in voting to leave the
European Union,
have sent shockwaves around the
world.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant begins
our coverage in London.
WOMAN: The U.K. has voted to
leave the European
Union.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The official
word came just
after 7:00 in the morning, U.K.
time.
Rapturous cheers went up at
leave parties.
The final tally, 52 percent,
more than 17
million people, opted to leave
the 28-member
European Union.
AILEEN QUINTAN, Leave Supporter:
We have actually
shown that opposition to the
E.U. isn't a
small fringe -- fringe minority.
MALCOLM BRABANT: For the 48
percent who voted
to stay, the result was
devastating.
MAN: I think it's going to lead
to great political,
economic, business uncertainty.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The political
fallout was
instant. Prime Minister David
Cameron, who
led the campaign to remain,
announced that
he will step down by October.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: I will
do everything I can as prime
minister to steady
the ship over the coming weeks
and months,
but I do not think it would be
right for me
to try to be the captain that
steers our country
to its next destination.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Cameron
promised the referendum
in 2013, in part to appease E.U.
skeptics
in his own conservative party.
MAN: We got our country back.
MALCOLM BRABANT: U.K.
Independence Party,
deeply anti-E.U., was elated in
victory. Its
leader, Nigel Farage, used an
anti-immigration
campaign to rally support.
NIGEL FARAGE, European
Parliament Member:
The E.U. is failing, the E.U. is
dying. I
hope we have knocked the first
brick out of
the wall. It's a victory for
ordinary people,
decent people. It's a victory
against the
big merchant banks, against the
big businesses
and against big politics.
MALCOLM BRABANT: From Brussels,
there was
a clear message that Britain
should leave
as soon as possible, and
shouldn't be given
any special treatment in order
to discourage
other nations from following
suit.
JEAN-CLAUDE JUNCKER, President,
European Commission
(through translator):
Personally, I'm very
sad about this decision, but, of
course, we
have to respect it. We will
stand strong and
uphold the European Union's core
values of
promoting peace and the
well-being of its
people'. The union of 27 member
states will
continue.
MALCOLM BRABANT: From German
Chancellor Angela
Merkel, there were questions
about what comes
next.
ANGELA MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through
translator): We don't know about
the consequences
of this step that will appear
within the next
days, weeks, months, and years.
That will
depend upon how we, the other 27
members,
are able and willing to react.
There is no
quick key solution that we can
take from this
referendum decision. That would
only divide
Europe even more.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So, what is the
mechanism
for separation? Britain is
required to invoke
the E.U.'s Article 50, which
gives London
two years to negotiate
withdrawal. That includes
the fate of existing trade
deals, and travel
and work within the E.U. for
British citizens.
A majority of the 27 other
member states must
approve the deal. All the
uncertainty sent
global markets from Tokyo to New
York into
freefall. And the British pound
plummeted
to its lowest point in over 30
years. The
economic fallout could be a sign
of things
to come, and those people who
voted to stay
in the European Union are
pointing to say
that they were right.
But it's done little to change
the convictions
of voters in the majority. Most
of London
voted to remain, but take a
journey to the
East End, and you meet poor
white working-class
Londoners who voted to leave.
They feel overwhelmed by
immigration, blaming
the newcomers for driving down
wages and taking
their jobs.
Brian Hughes is one of those
people.
BRIAN HUGHES, Driver: I think
it's due to
all the immigrants coming in the
country,
because they're getting cheaper
labor in,
basically. I have been a driver
for 27 years,
and I decided that I can't do
the job anymore,
even though there's nothing
wrong with me.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Novelist Dreda
Say Mitchell
believes that metropolitan
London has lost
touch.
DREDA SAY MITCHELL, Author: I
think we have
been living in a bubble, where
we have been
thinking that our experiences
within London
have been the same experiences
that most people
outside of London have been
having, and it's
not been true.
MALCOLM BRABANT: To the north,
in Edinburgh,
Scotland, where the remain vote
won, talk
on the streets was of a second
chance at independence
from Britain.
MAN: This will trigger a vote
for independence
in Scotland. And I think it's
one -- the same,
one that I would think very
differently about.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Scottish First
Minister Nicola
Sturgeon said that second vote
was highly
likely.
NICOLA STURGEON, Scottish First
Minister:
Scotland faces the prospect of
being taken
out of the E.U. against her
will. I regard
that as democratically
unacceptable.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Leaders in
Northern Ireland
made a similar call, saying
there should be
a vote to unite with the Irish
Republic.
MAN: For us to be dragged out of
European
Union against our will is
absolutely unacceptable.
MALCOLM BRABANT: All signs of
the seismic
change that has happened, and
may yet take
place in the future, all as a
result of yesterday's
vote -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Malcolm, I know
you talked
to a lot of people today out on
the streets.
What else did you hear from
them?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Well, it's -- I
think London
really is completely devastated
today, because
it is a city that in the main
voted to remain
in the E.U.
And I think the kind of
professional classes
are very sort of stunned by what
has happened.
They went to bed believing that
they were
going to be in the European
Union and woke
up to find out that they were in
a small little
island off the west coast of the
European
Union, and I think that's really
stunned them.
Boris Johnson today when he came
out of his
house, he was booed roundly by
people who
had gathered outside. There has
just been
a demonstration outside
Parliament of cyclists
who were cursing Boris as they
went past.
But I was down in East London
today and talked
to some people who were quite
happy about
this, but these were mainly sort
of white
people in an area that really
has been overwhelmed,
they would say, by immigrants.
And I talked
to a taxi driver, for example,
who said that
he voted for nostalgia. He
wanted it to go
back to the way it was before,
which to many
people would seem as not being a
very forward
way of thinking.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Malcolm,
just quickly,
what have you learned about who
-- how people
voted on each side by age, by
income?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Well, the most
staggering
fact of all, I think, is the age
difference
between those who voted to
remain and those
who voted to get out.
And the young people, more than
anybody else,
they wanted to stay in, because
it was their
future that they were voting
for. But it was
older people who decided that
they thought
it was best for Britain to go
out. And also
the same is true of the wealth
and also education
gap.
More wealthy, richer people,
better-educated
people, they voted to stay
within the European
Union. And those who are lower
down the socioeconomic
classes, they voted to get out.
And the key
sort of vote in all of this was
immigration.
And the people who wanted to
stay in thought
that immigration was a very good
thing, but
those who wanted to stay out
thought that
immigration was something that
really had
to change.
These are the main democratic
points of this
referendum.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I know
we're only beginning
to see the repercussions. And,
Malcolm, I
know you are going to continue
to report for
us. Thank you.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Thank you,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We take a closer
look now at
what drove those voters with Sir
Michael Leigh,
a former senior official with
the European
Union's executive arm, the
European Commission.
He's now a consultant to the
German Marshall
Fund. And Tim Montgomerie is a
conservative
columnist for The Times of
London.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Tim Montgomerie, to you first.
What was your
reaction?
TIM MONTGOMERIE, The Times of
London: Surprise,
first of all.
I think few people expected that
Brexit would
actually prevail. And it was a
close result,
just under 4 percent, but a
decisive result.
And I think what has been
impressive during
the course of the day is the
number of M.P.s
who had campaigned for Britain
to remain in
the European Union saying, the
British people
have spoken and they will
respect the result.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sir Michael
Leigh, what about
you?
SIR MICHAEL LEIGH, Former
European Union Official:
My main reaction was one of deep
sadness.
Part of it is personal, I
acknowledge. I worked
for three decades in the
European institutions.
And during that period, I
believe the European
Union was a major peace project
for Europe.
Britain had a decisive influence
on the way
the E.U. developed. I saw
Britain influencing
the single market, enlargement.
So, the E.U., I really felt was
an institution,
a set of institutions that
worked in the interest
of the U.K. and of Europe. And,
therefore,
I was deeply saddened by this
result.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Montgomerie,
what do you
believe was driving the vote
result here?
TIM MONTGOMERIE: I think what
Sir Michael
says about the European
project's past contribution
is correct, as the European
nations traded
with each other, and they found
themselves
together.
And the war that has
characterized the continent
in the past was put to an end.
But that European
project died. It became much
more ambitious.
It decided to abolish national
currencies
and wanted to abolish national
borders. And
with the Eurozone crisis and the
huge unemployment
and austerity it created, the
sense that the
passport-free zone, Schengen
zone, was ideal
for terrorist activity, I think
the British
people decided that the European
Union was
no longer working.
As 28 member states, it was a
dysfunctional
organization that couldn't take
decisions.
And the major cause for the
Brexit vote was
a freedom of movement regime,
which meant
that Britain didn't know from
one year to
the next how many immigrants
would be entering
the economy and it meant an
inability to plan
for public services like schools
and hospitals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sir Michael, is
that how you
see what went into people's
thinking?
SIR MICHAEL LEIGH: The issues
that Tim mentioned
are in fact quite pertinent. And
he's right
that the E.U. faces many real
challenges.
I only wish that the campaign,
particularly
on the leave side, had focused
on these issues.
Instead, it focused
single-mindedly on people's
fears of immigration, even in
areas with virtually
no immigrants, and it
concentrated on backward-looking
arguments related to
sovereignty, which have
little real meaning in this
globalized world.
So I feel the decision wasn't
taken after
a serious debate of the pros and
cons, but
rather than emotional argument
that looked
backwards, rather than forwards.
It looked
backwards to an imagined past, a
golden age
that will not come again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're describing
a misleading
campaign?
SIR MICHAEL LEIGH: I would say
it was seriously
misleading.
One of the main leaders of the
leave campaign,
Nigel Farage, had acknowledged
today one of
his main arguments, that the
E.U. was costing
the U.K. 380 million pounds, and
that this
money could be redeployed and
spent for the
National Health Service, was a
mistake.
It was also argued, for example,
that Turkey
was about to join the European
Union, and
we would be flooded with Turkish
immigrants.
Everyone knows Turkey will join
in a decade,
if ever.
And other such arguments that
played more
on fears than on the legitimate
issues that
Tim raised, where there should
have been a
proper debate on the relative
merits.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Montgomerie,
was it a misleading
campaign then after all?
TIM MONTGOMERIE: I think some of
the criticisms
Sir Michael makes of the leave
campaign are
fair.
I think it's also the case,
however, that
the remain campaign didn't ever
really try
to sell a positive view of the
European Union.
It was also based on scares. The
prime minister
said that leaving the European
Union would
put a bomb under the British
economy. There
was even hints that it might
lead to a world
war.
And the British people felt that
was insulting
to their country. The British
people are a
proud people. And I think it was
also the
case that when President Obama
came to London
and said to the British people
that, if they
didn't stay in the European
Union, they would
go to the back of the queue, the
back of the
line in terms of trade
negotiations with America,
if you are rude and insulting to
a people,
which I think David Cameron and
President
Obama could both be accused of
being guilty
of, people fight back.
And I don't think the American
people would
accept what the British people
have to accept
as members of the European
Union, a right,
for example, if it was in the
American situation,
for Mexicans and Canadians to be
able to work
and live in America freely
without restriction,
or for a supreme court in Ottawa
or Mexico
to rule over the U.S. Supreme
Court.
And I think the British people
weren't willing
to put up with that anymore
either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to get
your response
and I want to ask both of you if
you see this
result as permanent, as a result
that will
stand.
SIR MICHAEL LEIGH: This pretty
strong language
concerning President Obama that
we have just
heard sadly typified the leave
campaign and
is deeply to be regretted.
President Obama came to Britain
as a friend
of the United Kingdom. And
friends do give
advice to other friends. This is
something
that they do. If they think that
their friends
are about to take a misstep,
whether in public
or private life, they say so.
That's what
friendship is all about.
But to come to your second
question, I do
think this decision is
irreversible. There
has been a campaign. There has
been a referendum
based on universal suffrage. I
think there's
no turning back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Montgomerie,
is there a
turning back?
TIM MONTGOMERIE: I think that's
right. I hope
that's right. The British
people, against
the weight of advice of all of
the party leaders
in the British political system,
against IMF
and international institutions,
the president
of the United States and other
world leaders,
they ignored all of that because
they really
did feel that the European Union
was an insufferable
organization to continue to
belong to.
The E.U. has a habit of ignoring
the referenda
decision of member states, but I
don't think
Britain will allow their vote to
be ignored.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Montgomerie,
Sir Michael
Leigh, we thank you both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tim Montgomerie,
Sir Michael
Leigh, we thank you both.
Now a look at the potential
economic ramifications
of Brexit.
Many financial markets took an
outright beating
during a global sell-off today.
The Euro Stoxx
Index, a broad measure of stocks
in the Eurozone,
fell by almost 8 percent.
London's FTSE Exchange
lost 3 percent. And the Japanese
Nikkei dropped
by nearly 8 percent.
American markets took big hits
too. The Dow
Jones suffered its largest loss
of the year
and gave all of its gains for
2016. It was
down 611 points, or nearly 3.4
percent. The
Nasdaq dropped 202 points, or 4
percent, and
the S&P fell 76 points, or 3.6
percent.
Hari Sreenivasan has this part
of the story
from our New York studios.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Some analysts
suggest that
leaving the E.U. could plunge
the U.K. back
into recession, and the
consequences could
potentially spread into the
wider global economy.
We look at the concerns here and
abroad with
two who watch this closely,
Diane Swonk, the
founder of her own firm, DS
Economics, and
David Wessel, director of the
Hutchins Center
on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at
the Brookings
Institution and contributing
correspondent
for The Wall Street Journal.
Diane, I want to start with you.
The markets in the U.S. were
down 611 points.
The markets in Europe and Asia,
some of them
suffered even greater percentage
losses. What's
the core worry for the world
here? Why these
ripple effects?
DIANE SWONK, Founder, DS
Economics: Well,
the real worry is not only will
the U.K. perhaps
slip into recession -- it's
about 2.5 percent
of the global economy -- but
that there could
be domino effects throughout the
European
Union, as other countries come
to the same
verdict and want to opt out of
the European
Union.
Remember, this is an area where
many companies
got a lot of efficiencies by the
fact that
there was free trade and people
could so easily
move between countries. Now that
those trade
-- those barriers are going to
be much higher,
that will cost companies a lot
more money.
And also many companies will
have to move
their location out of London, to
perhaps Ireland,
Dublin, or Frankfurt.
And I think that's where the
concerns are
coming, is, what is the bottom
line for profits,
not only in terms of growth and
exports, but
also what is it going to mean in
terms of
additional costs for those
companies as they
operate on a global basis?
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, how
does this impact
companies doing business in the
U.S.?
DAVID WESSEL, The Wall Street
Journal: Well,
I think, generally, it means
that American
companies will sell less stuff
abroad.
The U.K. is a very small part of
American
exports, but Europe as a whole
is about a
quarter of all U.S. exports.
That's a lot.
The less well their economy
does, the less
stuff they will buy from us.
That means fewer
sales, fewer profits and fewer
jobs here.
But I think the reason the
markets are reacting
goes beyond that. One is that
the value of
the dollar has gone up a lot.
And as people
freak out about what's going on
in Europe,
the dollar foreign exchange
value will go
higher. That means it will be
great for people
who are going to vacation in
Europe, but that
makes it even worse for American
exporters.
It acts like a brake on the U.S.
economy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Diane, outside
of today,
then, what are the impacts on
the U.S. companies?
DIANE SWONK: Well, I think, on
net, it is
a dampening effect on the U.S.
economy, not
enough for us to take down our
forecasts yet,
because of the uncertainty
surrounding it.
There is the near term. As David
mentioned,
it's now cheaper to go to
Europe. It's also
going to be easier to get a --
refinance your
mortgage at a lower rate. And
the Fed is now
on the sidelines to try to
support the economy.
All those are meant to cushion
the blow of
what David really accurately
pointed out,
that stronger dollar harder on
manufacturers,
insult to injury to a part of
the economy
that's already been suffering a
lot.
And so, on net, a minor
negative, but overall
the U.S. economy should be able
to weather
the storm coming from Europe.
The problem
is the uncertainty. And I think
that is what
you're seeing roil markets is,
we just don't
know how far this could -- the
domino effect
could be beyond the initial U.K.
vote.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, there
is that old
adage buy on the rumor, sell on
the news.
Having the actual act happen
today, doesn't
that add some certainty, or as
Diane is saying,
we don't know exactly what the
next shoe is
and when it's going to drop?
DAVID WESSEL: Well, I think the
markets were
a little surprised by the news.
That's why
there was such a big reaction.
There isn't much certainty,
other than Europe
is -- the U.K. is pulling out of
the European
Union. But I think there is a
broader thing
going on here. This is a bunch
of people in
a democracy voting to repudiate
trade, globalization,
immigration, all those things
that a lot of
people think have been important
in the growth
of the world economy.
And I think the concern is that
this is a
symptom of a broader malaise.
It's true on
the continent of Europe and it's
also true
here in the United States. And
so people are
thinking is the whole approach
to world trade,
to globalization, grappling
together with
global problems through these
institutions,
is that now all being called
into question?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Diane, how
much is this
a referendum on the free trade
policies that
the world has been pushing for
the last few
decades?
DIANE SWONK: Well, I think David
is exactly
right about that.
This is a backlash to
globalization and to
really the post-World War II
era. They have
been in for 43 years, remember,
in the European
Union, the U.K. had. And I think
this really
is a global situation, a global
backlash to
that.
And what concerns me and what
concerns I think
financial markets as well is
that it's a backlash
to institutions and to all the
warnings as
well. There is a will break. And
it's going
-- it is global in nature in
terms of the
socioeconomic, how the vote went
down, the
younger people wanting to stay
in, more educated,
higher -- and wealthier people
wanting to
stay in the European Union,
similar things,
and seeing immigration as a
positive instead
of a negative.
Similar things are going on here
in the United
States. We're seeing the
backlash to free
trade, the backlash to
immigration, the desire
to build walls, instead of open
borders. And
that really is a breakdown of
what we knew
as a post-World War II
prosperity. And I think
that should rattle markets.
This is a -- could be a paradigm
shift, if
it's not contained. And that's
where the uncertainty
is, is, we don't know how far
it's going to
go because it isn't just one
country. It's
many countries that are
experiencing the same
thing. And we just don't know
how far the
reaction function is going to
go.
HARI SREENIVASAN: David, what
about the idea
of containment? Even if the Bank
of England
stands there today and says we
will do what
we have to, to prop up the
British pound,
what about these other countries
now that
are saying maybe this is our
license to walk
out of the E.U. ourselves?
DAVID WESSEL: Right. I think
that's a big
issue.
Look, the central banks and the
finance ministries
will try and manage the shifting
markets,
the turmoil to make sure that we
don't have
some breakdown, some bank
failure or some
disorderly trading.
But I think that you're pointing
out this
is a symptom of a much bigger
thing. Will
the Dutch think about leaving
the European
Union? Is this basically the end
of an era
of European integration? I think
it puts a
real pressure on global elites
in business
and academics, politicians who
believe in
globalization, who believe that
we have to
make international agreements to
solve global
problems, to find a way to
address the anger
of people who felt left out,
whose wages haven't
gone up, who, like, don't trust
the government
and the experts anymore.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Diane Swonk,
David Wessel, thanks so much for
joining us.
DIANE SWONK: Thank you.
DAVID WESSEL: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we heard
earlier, President
Obama, during a trip to the
United Kingdom
in April, said that it should
stay in the
European Union.
Today, from Stanford University
in California,
the president gave his appraisal
of yesterday's
outcome.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
While the U.K.'s relationship
with E.U. will
change, one thing that will not
change is
the special relationship that
exists between
our two nations. That will
endure.
The E.U. will remain one of our
indispensable
partners. Our NATO alliance will
remain a
cornerstone of global security,
and in a few
weeks, we will be meeting in
Warsaw for the
NATO summit. And our shared
values, including
our commitment to democracy and
pluralism
and opportunity for all people
in a globalized
world, that will continue to
unite all of
us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
spoke with David
Cameron by phone today, and,
according to
the White House, expressed
regret that his
-- quote -- "trusted partner and
friend" decided
to step aside as prime minister.
Mr. Obama also spoke with German
Chancellor
Angela Merkel. The two leaders
said they regretted
the U.K.'s decision to leave the
E.U., but
that they respected the will of
the British
people.
Now there are serious questions
about how
this break may change the
current of global
politics.
We explore what may lie ahead
with Ivo Daalder.
He's a former U.S. ambassador to
NATO. He's
now at the Chicago Council on
Global Affairs.
Richard Haass is a former State
Department
and top National Security
Council official.
He now runs the Council on
Foreign Relations.
And Margaret Warner, the
"NewsHour"'s chief
foreign affairs correspondent.
And welcome to all three of you.
Richard Haass, I'm going to
start with you.
We just heard two guests say
that this could
be the end of an era in terms of
global economics.
What about in terms of the
politics of this
globe?
RICHARD HAASS, President,
Council on Foreign
Relations: Well, I think
historians will look
back on this, and this will be
something of
a defining or dividing line in
terms of the
U.S.-U.K. relationship.
The president can use the
rhetoric about it
being special, but the fact is,
it isn't very
special anymore, and Britain
won't have the
capacity to be a real partner,
particularly,
as I think is likely, Scotland
ultimately
leaves and potentially even
Northern Ireland
leaves, so the United Kingdom
becomes the
disunited Kingdom.
It's also very bad for what's
going on in
Europe. It's not just economic
integration,
but it's the entire European
project, and
now lots of other countries may
decide to
find their own path to distance
themselves
from Europe.
And that's a big part of the
post-World War
II architecture. It's one of the
great accomplishments
of modern diplomacy, to make
Europe stable
and prosperous. So, I actually
think the last
24 hours, whatever the voters
had in mind,
wanted message they wanted to
send to elites
and establishment, they set in
motion a dynamic
that will really detract from
prosperity and
stability, I think, in Europe
and conceivably
beyond.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ivo Daalder, how
do you see
the politicalo~ fallout?
IVO DAALDER, Former U.S.
Ambassador to NATO:
Well, I think it is potentially
grave as Richard
is implying.
I think what we're seeing is not
only the
return of nationalism in the
United Kingdom,
and particularly in England, but
that nationalism
can spread throughout the
continent. And you
have already seen calls in the
Netherlands
for a referendum there, for a
Nexit. You have
seen the same in France for a
possible referendum
for France to leave the Union.
And what you see is nations
turning inward,
becoming more nationalistic,
wanting to be
self-reliant, breaking away from
the European
Union. And, as a result, you get
the kind
of re-nationalization of
European politics
that we saw in the '20s and the
'30s. And
we know what the consequences of
that was.
So there is the very real
possibility of this
spreading to the continent with
more and more
countries trying to leave the
union, trying
to turn inward, finding it
difficult to achieve
what they want to achieve, and
therefore turning
against each other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, some of
this sounds fairly
dire.
Margaret, I know you have been
talking to
a number of U.S. officials
today. How do they
see the effect of all this
politically?
MARGARET WARNER: Very much the
way Richard
Haass and Ivo Daalder do.
Today, when he we heard what the
president
had to say, one official said to
me, well,
that was no drama Obama. But in
the weeks
leading up to this, as it got
close, intelligence,
diplomatic and defense officials
all were
very -- were filled with dread
really about
the consequences of this.
I mean, nothing will change in
terms of the
U.K. being a major partner. I
mean, this is
a country that we share language
and culture
and world view. But, as Richard
said, the
concern is that it will be a
less effective
partner, that is, that Prime
Minister Cameron
and whoever succeeds him will be
a distracted
partner, that they will be
potentially weaker
because there will be -- if
there's a breakup
in the British Isles, and also a
poorer partner,
as one official said to me, who
may not even
be able to make the 2 percent
threshold in
NATO.
So -- and, finally, of course,
there's the
whole question about whether it
weakens U.S.
diplomatic leverage in Europe.
Now, some people
feel that's been overstated. It
wasn't terribly
effective to work through
Britain, say, to
get Germany last year to soften
the terms
for Greece.
But, still, with Europe -- with
the U.K. having
a seat at the table, the U.S.
had at least
eyes on the table, and that
won't be true
anymore.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Richard Haass,
how much at
this point depends on how this
is handled
by world leaders, whether it is
by the British
leadership, by people like
Chancellor Merkel,
President Obama? How much could
that affect
what happens?
RICHARD HAASS: Not all that
much, I'm afraid,
Judy.
In terms of the British, they
have got really
limited discretion. It's very
hard for a prime
minister, for Mr. Cameron's
successor, for
the Parliament to somehow ignore
the -- quote,
unquote -- "will or voice" of
the British
people.
And then, looking at it from the
other side,
I don't think Brussels is going
to necessarily
tell the British, well, never
mind, or somehow
set a precedent that then 27
other countries
might say, OK, we can then
define our own
relationship. Let's have an a la
carte relationship
that lets us choose A, B, C, but
we will ignore
D and F.
So I actually think, on both
sides, the hands
are relatively tied. And I know
this sounds
pessimistic. And there are
people who are
saying just maybe we can work
through this
and it wasn't that definitive,
but I actually
don't think so.
And even if there is
considerable voters'
remorse -- and I expect there
will be something
of a collective hangover once
the reality
sinks in of the repercussions --
I still don't
think even the British side or
the European
side are going to have that much
discretion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ivo Daalder, pick
up on that.
What do you see could determine
whether this
goes in an even darker, or more
disturbing
direction? What could keep
things on track?
I mean, who has the ability to
determine which
direction it goes?
IVO DAALDER: So, I agree that
there is not
much leverage or capacity in
Britain, certainly
with a lame-duck and now
defeated prime minister
still on the helm, and then a
victor coming
in who really doesn't know what
needs to be
done.
But I don't necessarily agree
that there isn't
any leverage or room for
maneuver, particularly
with Chancellor Merkel and with
the United
States.
Stepping back, we have been at
this 70 years.
This is not just a European
project. It's
very much an American project,
and we have
been central for those 70 years
to cajole
the Europeans at particular
times, when things
were going the wrong way, to do
the right
thing and work together.
Our leverage isn't the same as
it was in the
'40s, and the '50s and the '60s,
but it's
still there. We're still a very
critical partner.
And I do believe that, if the
United States,
particularly working together
with Chancellor
Merkel, were to make it very
clear that, yes,
we accept the results of the
voters, and,
yes, there will be a different
relationship
between the United Kingdom and
the European
Union, but we still want the
United Kingdom
to be a fundamental, strong
European power,
and we want the Europeans and
the United Kingdom
and the United States to work
closely together
-- we will do it in NATO.
We will do it on an ad hoc basis
outside of
it, but we need to work this out
together
in order to maintain this -- the
essential
European project that was
started 70 years
ago. It's a defining moment for
American diplomacy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Margaret, in
talking to
U.S. officials, do they
recognize that? Are
they prepared to move in that
direction?
MARGARET WARNER: Very much so,
Judy.
As Ivo Daalder just said, the
American security
for 70 or 80 years has relied on
a strong,
prosperous, united Europe that
we spent billions,
trillions, I guess, through the
Marshall Plan
on forward, and diplomatic years
and decades
to help establish.
And then you recall, after the
Soviet Union
collapsed, the way to get the
Central and
East European countries as part
of this, with
all their ethnic conflicts and
everything,
was the carrot of E.U.
membership. That was
the incentive.
So it's been very, very
important. What U.S.
officials are hoping, going back
to Richard
Haass' point, about buyer's
remorse, is that,
if the train can be slowed down
of a lot of
other countries clamoring to do
this, that
other Europeans will witness
what happens
to Britain now, and it probably
won't be a
pretty sight in the medium term.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there is
much more to
unfold.
And we want to thank all three
of you for
taking a look with us tonight.
Margaret, Margaret Warner here,
Richard Haass,
Ivo Daalder, we thank you.
RICHARD HAASS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: A
bipartisan group of members of
Congress unveiled
a companion bill to the gun
control measure
put forward in the Senate by
Maine Republican
Susan Collins. The legislation
would ban anyone
on the government's no-fly list
from buying
guns.
Today, Virginia Republican
Representative
Scott Rigell, a lifetime NRA
member who owns
10 firearms himself, said he's
urging House
Speaker Paul Ryan to support
their plan.
REP. SCOTT RIGELL (R), Virginia:
If someone
represents such a threat that we
don't want
them on a plane, why in the
world would we
let them go in and buy a gun?
We are going to be pressing the
speaker's
office. I'm not going to tell
you exactly
when, but I have got an
appointment today
with the office, and when we
come back into
session, the pressure will be
continuous.
It'll be respectful, but we're
not going to
let go of this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Senate's
version of the
gun control bill cleared a
procedural vote
yesterday. But it's effectively
stalled after
falling short of the 60 votes
needed to survive
a filibuster.
In West Virginia, at least 18
people are dead
in some of that state's worst
flooding in
a century. Many of the deaths
came in Greenbrier
County, one of the hardest-hit
areas. Thunderstorms
have dumped up to nine inches of
rain in some
parts of West Virginia since
yesterday. Tens
of thousands were without power
and several
roads were impassable.
Governor Earl Ray Tomblin:
GOV. EARL RAY TOMBLIN (D), West
Virginia:
Initial reports from our local
emergency management
officials indicate at least six
counties have
seen extensive structural
damage.
Early reports indicate more than
100 homes
have been seriously damaged or
destroyed.
While it appears the active
phase of this
event will end today or
tomorrow, there will
be an enormous amount of
recovery work.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomblin said he's
authorized
up to 500 members of the
National Guard to
help.
In Eastern China, the death toll
from yesterday's
massive storm has now risen to
nearly 100
people. The number of injured
also climbed
to over 800, following the
tornado that packed
winds of about 80 miles per
hour. Rescuers
continued their search for
survivors today,
while area residents spent the
day combing
through the debris of their
collapsed houses.
The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
today confirmed what has long
been suspected
in the Flint, Michigan, water
crisis. A CDC
investigation found lead levels
in young children
who drank tap water spiked
significantly after
the city changed its water
source to the Flint
River in 2014.
Researchers found the children
had a 50 percent
higher risk of dangerously
elevated lead levels
in their bloodstream than before
the switch.
And President Obama is
designating New York
City's Stonewall Inn as a
national monument,
the country's first to honor gay
rights. After
a 1969 police raid on the
Greenwich Village
gay bar triggered an uprising,
it became widely
viewed as the birthplace of the
gay rights
movement.
In his announcement, Mr. Obama
said America's
national parks should reflect --
quote -- "the
full story of our country."
The presidential nominees also
weighed in
on the Brexit result today.
During a press conference at his
Scottish
resort and golf course this
morning, Donald
Trump praised Britain's decision
to leave
the E.U.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I really do see a parallel
between what's
happening in the United States
and what's
happening here. People want to
see borders.
They don't necessarily want
people pouring
into their country, that they
don't know who
they are and where they come
from. They have
no idea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
also responded
to Britain's vote to leave. In a
statement
today, the former secretary of
state said
-- quote -- "We respect the
choice the people
of the United Kingdom have
made."
And now to the analysis of
Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields,
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks.
Welcome to you both.
This whole program up until now
practically
has been about the vote in the
U.K., David,
to leave the European Union.
What do you make
of this?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, in country
after country,
we're seeing a conflict between
what you might
call urban cosmopolitans and
less well-educated
ethnic nationalism, and ethnic
nationalism
is on the rise.
And I agree with everything that
Ivo, Richard
and Margaret were saying, but it
should be
said -- and I covered -- I lived
in Brussels
for five years at the Maastricht
Treaty, when
all this was coming together --
and the elites,
as much as I hate the leave --
the fact that
the U.K. is going to leave the
E.U., the elites
in some large degree brought
this on themselves.
There was built into the
European unification
project an anti-democratic, a
condescending,
and a snobbish attitude about
popular democracy.
And, secondly -- and this is
also true here
-- and I'm as pro-immigration as
the day is
long, but we have asked a lot of
people who
are suffering in this company to
accept extremely,
radically high immigration
levels.
And we have probably overflooded
the system.
And so while it's easy -- and I
do condemn
the vote to leave, get out -- a
little humility
is in order on the part of the
establishment,
frankly, that we have flooded
the system with
more than it can handle. And,
secondly, we
have not provided a good
nationalism, a good
patriotism that is cosmopolitan,
that is outward-spanning,
and that is confident. And,
therefore, a bad
form of parochial,
inward-looking Trumpian
nationalism has had free rein.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, the elites
brought it
on themselves?
MARK SHIELDS: I think the forces
and the advocates
of globalization have been
primarily obsessed
with the well-being of the
investor class
and the stockholders and the
shareholders,
and been indifferent, oftentimes
callous,
to the dislocation and the
suffering that
people in countries affected by
this trade,
the expanded trade, the larger
economy, who
have been victimized by it.
And it has been a accompanied, I
think, by
an elitist condescension, in
many cases, and
it's been taken advantage of. I
mean, the
shorthand today is that we saw
the words of
the Republican nominee in
waiting, who is
a part-time presidential
candidate and a full-time
real estate developer, you know,
he won, and
Barack Obama lost, I mean, by
any scorecard.
There is no spin you can put on
this that
in any way comforts Democrats
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If this is the
case, then,
David, what should we expect?
Does this mean
that the U.S. is going to do
something similar
in the election in November?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I don't
know, of course.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, not that
we have to
vote to leave the E.U., but...
DAVID BROOKS: Let's consider
this one of a
link in a long chain of the rise
of ethnic
nationalism.
As I mentioned, I was in Europe
in the early
'90s. And from '45 through
really '94, we
had this just big process of
integration,
with the international
institutions. We had
trade agreements. We had the
European project,
the fall of the Berlin Wall.
And then I remember, at the end
of my stay
there, Yugoslavia pulled apart.
And then you
had the Serbs and the Bosnians
and a horrific
war. And, suddenly, you began to
see the nationalism
rising up in a way we have seen
sort of ethnic
nationalism rising up in the
Middle East.
We have seen polarization in
this country.
We have seen economic
segmentation.
So, we're -- if we came together
for 40 years,
we have been segmenting and
splitting apart
for all this time. And we should
expect a
lot more of this sort of
behavior, unless
we have some sort of radical
change in our
politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you see
something like this
happening in this country?
MARK SHIELDS: I think there is
no question
part of Donald Trump's appeal is
to people
who have been dislocated.
This week, Peter Hart for the
Annenberg Public
Policy Center at the University
of Pennsylvania
conducted a focus group of
really struggling
middle-class workers,
blue-collar, and service
industry workers, most of whom
were sympathetic.
There were some Clinton
supporters, but who
were understanding. They felt
that Trump at
least was acknowledging them,
that the two
parties had been indifferent to
their plight.
It is no accident, Judy, that
the median household
income in the United States is
lower today
than it was 20 years ago. And
that has a political
cost to it. And as the top 1
percent and the
top two-tenths of 1 percent have
flourished
and prevailed, the rising tide
has lifted
all yachts, but an awful a lot
of boats have
been washed up on the shore.
DAVID BROOKS: I would just like
to marry something
Mark is talking and something
I'm talking
about, which are related, the
economic stagnation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: But it's also
feeding into and
sort of intertwining with a
cultural sense
of loss.
And if you look at Trump voters,
for example,
and certainly probably true of
Brexit voters,
they think immigration is a
force for harm,
not good. They think people like
themselves,
basically white people, are
discriminated
against as much as anybody else.
They think
the country has because too
multicultural.
And so these two forces, a sense
of ethnic
loss and economic loss, are
coming together.
And that's certainly a dangerous
formula.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, where does
that leave -- go
ahead, yes.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
And I don't argue with David's
numbers. But
these are not knuckle-dragging
people who
are, you know, out of the cast
of "Deliverance."
These are people who are
really...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean the
people who voted?
MARK SHIELDS: The people who are
supporting
Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump.
MARK SHIELDS: They're struggling
to make it
against enormous costs.
It's no accident that the
highest debt load
of any generation in history are
those graduating
from college this year. The only
one who were
high were the ones who graduated
last year.
And the only ones that will be
higher than
that will be the ones graduating
next year.
So there is. And you can look at
the job picture,
and it is hardly encouraging.
So, when you
growing at eight-tenths of 1
percent, you
know, it's one thing to be
accepting of change
when that change is working for
everyone.
And that certainly was the case
in the United
States for the half-century that
David described
from '45 to '95.
It was a remarkable epic and era
in world
history.
DAVID BROOKS: And it should be
said that fear
of cultural -- loss of cultural
cohesion is
not silly either.
England is a certain thing. And
America is
a certain thing. And to lose
that thing, because
we have radically encouraged
immigration,
I think the dynamism is worth
it, but it's
completely reasonable to think,
I'm losing
the country we have had for
centuries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you talked a
minute ago,
David, about immigration.
It sounds as if you're saying
that Donald
Trump is the only one out there
speaking,
Bernie Sanders to some extent,
certainly during
the primaries. Is Donald Trump
the only one
of the two presidential
candidates speaking
to these people?
DAVID BROOKS: I just saw a poll
today. If
you ask Donald Trump supporters
do they think
immigration is good or bad for
the country,
80 percent say it's bad.
If you ask, is the country -- do
they mind
that they're around people who
don't speak
English well, three-quarters
mind. And so
there is just an -- not an
intolerance, but
a sense that the country is
getting too diverse,
and that somehow they're the
losers in this
process, or the country as a
whole is a loser
in the process, it's a sinking
ship.
And so that is, I think, at the
central core
of what Trump is tapping into.
MARK SHIELDS: When you're
talking about people
who are struggling to get by
economically,
these are the ones who are
competing with
people who come to this country
who are themselves
trying to aspire to a better
life.
And so they are competing,
really, for the
same economic positions, whether
it's a driver
or whether it's in the service
industry. And
so, understandably, they see
them as a threat
economically and culturally, as
David described.
But, at the same time, we stand
alone as a
country of assimilation, a
country of immigrants.
I mean, we are not the United
Kingdom. I mean,
if this -- if Brexit or the
equivalent thereof
were put to the United States,
we're talking
about a third of the electorate
who are nonwhite.
DAVID BROOKS: The irony, though,
is that the
U.K. and U.S. are probably the
two best -- two
of the best countries in the
world...
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: ... pretty
cosmopolitan ways.
And the one amendment I would
make is, Trump
voters in the primaries, the
average income
was $74,000, which is well above
the median
in this country. So, they tend
to be affluent
people from poor places. And so
it's a sense
of collective loss, as much as
personal loss,
that is driving a lot of those
voters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to --
while we're touching
on immigration, two other things
I want to
ask you about, Mark.
Mark, one is the Supreme Court
decision this
week effectively to -- what
means the president's
effort to at least provide some
protection
for those undocumented
immigrants who are
in this country, maybe the
parents or the
children of others who are here
legally, the
court said that is going to go
back to a lower
court. We will see what happens.
But it's a big setback for the
president.
What does it say going forward?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, it's a
setback to his
legacy.
It says that, 2013, 68 United
States senators
supported -- voted for a
solution to this
problem, to let people come out
of the shadows,
the parents, the relatives of
children who
were American citizens, that
they wouldn't
be worried about immigration
authorities showing
up and knocking on their door.
And it means
that his legacy is depleted,
that you can
only do so much by executive
order, that we
never got a vote in the House of
Representatives.
The House of Representatives
never voted on
the immigration act in 2013.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes,
substantively, I think
it's a setback, because so many
people's lives
are now made more precarious.
As a matter of process -- and
process matters
when we think about the
Constitution -- I'm
glad the court did what it did.
You can't
-- when you change the status of
five million
people, say, that's a big thing.
And that,
to me, is something that should
be done by
law, through Congress, through
the executive
action, through -- I mean,
through executive
signing the bill.
It should be done in the normal
constitutional
process. For one man, one
president to make
a change in American life that
big through
executive action seems to be
overreaching
the powers of the presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK, and the a
little over a
minute left.
I want to ask you both about
this pretty unprecedented
move, Mark, in the House of
Representatives,
Democrats sitting on the floor
for hours and
hours to make a statement about
gun control,
that they wanted legislation
called up for
a vote.
In the end, they have -- the
House is now
in recess. What did the
Democrats accomplish?
Was this an effective move on
their part?
MARK SHIELDS: What they did,
Judy, was they
got incredible attention to it.
I mean, having John Lewis, a
civil rights
icon who had led sit-ins in
civil rights,
lead this brought the attention.
I don't think
there is any question that there
is a profound
change in public attitudes in
support of background
checks. And I think Hillary
Clinton, as the
Democratic nominee, support for
the abolition
of assault weapons will be a
political advantage
in 2016.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Twenty seconds.
DAVID BROOKS: I have do have
questions about
that.
The people who -- there may be a
shift on
guns, but the people who vote on
the gun issue
have tended to be on the NRA
side. It seems
to me it's a very open question
whether that's
changed at all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields,
a big week of news. Thank you
both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Brooks,
Mark Shields,
a big week of news. Thank you
both.
Finally, tonight, we mark the
passing of a
bluegrass pioneer.
Ralph Stanley died overnight at
the age of
89, after a long battle with
skin cancer.
His haunting voice epitomized
what became
known as the music genre's high
lonesome sound,
since forming the band the
Stanley Brothers
and their Clinch Mountain Boys
in 1946.
But Stanley rose to wider fame
with his appearance
in the 2000 film "O Brother,
Where Art Thou?"
for which he won a Grammy.
The "NewsHour"'s Jeffrey Brown
spoke with
Stanley back in 2002, and asked
him to explain
his distinct singing style.
Here's part of
that profile.
RALPH STANLEY, Musician: Now,
that's not my
voice.
JEFFREY BROWN: What do you mean?
RALPH STANLEY: That's a
God-given voice.
If it wasn't for the lord's
will, I couldn't
-- I couldn't sing that way. He
gives everybody
everything they have. That's
what I'm a telling
you about changing maybe a verse
or maybe
a word or two. It can come to me
that way.
See, that's what you call the
spirit comes
to you.
Hey, sometimes, I can't sing a
lick. Sometimes,
I feel real good. Sometimes, I
feel like just
jumping straight up. That's when
you can really
do the singing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just jumping
straight up in
the air?
RALPH STANLEY: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Ralph Stanley is
at his most
haunting and ghostly in the
unaccompanied
dirge "O Death."
RALPH STANLEY: There's never
been truer words
ever written, because every word
in that "O
Death" song is going to come.
It's going to
come to you and me and everybody
else.
And I try my best to make people
understand
it when I sing that, that it is.
I never think
And I try my best to make people
understand
it when I sing that, that it is.
I never think
about it, but I know every -- I
sing that
every night. And I know that,
one day, maybe
tomorrow, or maybe 50 years from
today, that's
coming to me, see?
It's already come to a lot of
people. And
that's true, a true song.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
more of Jeff's
profile of Ralph Stanley online
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington
Week," which airs later this
evening on PBS,
and she's here now with a
preview.
GWEN IFILL: Hi, Judy.
We are picking up where you
leave off tonight
with more analysis of the
surprises this week,
on Brexit, at the Supreme Court,
on the campaign
trail, and the social
media-powered sit-in
on the House floor. So much to
talk about,
and we will tackle it tonight on
"Washington
Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
watching.
And tune in for special "PBS
NewsHour Weekend"
coverage of the U.K.'s dramatic
break from
the E.U. Hari will anchor both
nights from
London.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Have a great
weekend. Thank
you, and good night